# "I Have Called You Friends": Social Networks and Characterization in the Gospels

## Topic

My dissertation uses social network analysis (SNA) to situate the New Testament Gospels within the context of other Greco-Roman biographies--works to which, Burridge has shown, the Gospels bear a "family resemblance" [@Burridge2004WhatAre, pp. 37-43 *et passim*]. I examine the characterization in the four canonical Gospels, as well as Burridge's sample of "later Graeco-Roman *bioi*" (viz. Tacitus' *Agricola*, Plutarch's *Cato Minor*, Lucian's *Demonax*, Philostratus' *Apollonius of Tyana*, and Suetonius' *Lives of the Caesars*).^[For ease of expression, I refer to these five works as "Burridge's corpus."] More broadly, my goal is twofold: to propose new methods for the interpretation of the Gospels through an innovative "distant reading" [@Moretti2013DistantReading] strategy for the analysis of literary characters and to make a contribution to the field of digital humanities by suggesting new ways of applying social network analysis to the study of literature.

The bulk of the dissertation will be devoted to testing current ideas about characterization in the Gospels and developing a theory of character that takes into account characters' structural roles in each of the Gospels. As @Bennema2014Theory notes, very little work has been done to create a theory of character that applies to all four Gospels. This dissertation will fill that gap by 1) measuring characters' degree and centrality (which are standard network measurements, well established in the literature) to quantify characters' plot functions, and 2) developing a set of criteria that determine where a character falls on the spectrum/a of characterization. I will nuance that portrait by performing experiments on the networks to uncover circumstances under which a character's role might change. Throughout, I will compare characterization in the Gospels and Burridge's corpus, in order to expand my theory of character to Greco-Roman biography in general. The dissertation will conclude with an exploration of the Gospels' genre. The genre of the Gospels is still largely an open question; however, as @ArdanuySporleder2014Clustering have recently shown, social networks are useful for classifying works according to genre. Incorporating my data on characters' structural roles with additional measures of network structure (e.g., small-world-ness and assortativity), I test how far the Gospels' resemblance to other biographies extends: whether it is primarily at the syntactic level, as in Burridge's work, or if it also includes the structures of the works' plots.

This dissertation will be an important contribution to New Testament Studies in several ways. For one, it is the first monograph-length network analysis—a methodology that has yielded concrete interpretive insights into other texts—of the Gospels. Second, because SNA provides a rigorous means of testing existing theories and developing new hypotheses, my dissertation will contribute to ongoing scholarly conversations about characterization in the Gospels, showing that plot function is a good index of a character's role, but that it is insufficient simply to position characters along a continuum between minority and majority. Third, it will help to answer the longstanding question about the Gospels' genre, which has been a matter of debate for decades.

## State of the Question

### Social Network Analysis of the New Testament

Social network analysis has long been a productive methodology in NT studies, especially in Pauline studies. Chow's *Patronage and Power* [-@Chow1992Patronage], which uses SNA to study the power relations in the church at Corinth, is seminal. Malina and Pilch's *Social-Science Commentary on the Letters of Paul* [-@MalinaPilch2006SocSciPaul] also uses SNA throughout, though social networks are not the main focus of the work. In addition, Malina has edited a series of monographs covering individual members of Paul's social network.

Given how useful SNA has been to scholars of Paul, it is somewhat surprising that more Gospels scholars have not adopted it. As with Malina and Pilch's commentary on Paul, Malina and Rohrbaugh have used SNA in their *Social-Science Commentaries* on the Synoptic Gospels [@MalinaRohrbaugh2003SocSciSynoptics] and on John [@MalinaRohrbaugh1998SocSciJohn], though their analysis focuses exclusively on the "gossip network" surrounding Jesus. In addition, Duling has read his reconstruction of the historical Jesus movement through a network-analytical lens in a series of articles [@Duling1999SNA1; @Duling2000SNA2; reprinted together as @Duling2002SNACombo]. However, his argument treats SNA as a theory in itself, rather than--as has long been acknowledged in sociological network analysis--a means of testing and producing theories.^[On SNA as method vs. theory, see @WassermanFaust1994SNA, p. 5.] Finally, Miyake has studied the Gospels' networks in several presentations at Digital Humanities conferences [@Miyake2007Network; @Miyake2008Investigating; @Miyake2009Capturing; @AkamaMiyakeJung2011Automatic]; however, her work focuses primarily on the semantic networks of NT Greek, with social networks only as a secondary emphasis. In all, no sustained analysis has been performed on the social networks of literary characters in the Gospels, leaving a sizeable gap that this dissertation hopes to fill.

### Literary Social Network Analysis

This project will engage with other fields beyond the highly specialized work in Gospels SNA, namely literary SNA (including computer science fields such as natural language processing \[NLP\]) and narrative criticism of the Gospels. Literary SNA is an active field, with many important works being published in the past decade. Moretti's work has been especially important. He uses network analysis for book history in his *Graphs, Maps, Trees* [@Moretti2005GraphsMapsTrees] and for literary criticism in his article/pamphlet "Network Theory, Plot Analysis" [@Moretti2011NewLeft; expanded and republished as @Moretti2001LitLab]; in the latter, he uses graph analysis to study the plots of *Hamlet*, *Our Mutual Friend*, and *The Story of the Stone*. Though Moretti was far from the first author to incorporate SNA into literary studies, he brought the methodology into the mainstream, tying it to his broader approach of distant reading.

Researchers at Columbia University have also been prolific in this area. @ElsonDamesMcKeown2010Extracting is particularly influential, due to the paper's conclusions: the authors use social networks to disprove a longstanding theory about characterization in nineteenth-century novels set in rural, as opposed to urban, areas. More recently, Columbia-school SNA has focused on creating standalone tools for building and/or studying literary social networks (for instance, `Scheherezade` [@Elson2012Modeling] and `SINNET` [@Agarwal2013SINNET]). The Columbia-school approach contrasts well with Moretti's. Though Moretti manually draws the graphs in "Network Theory, Plot Analysis" and avoids the "stern adulthood of statistics" [@Moretti2001LitLab, p. 3], his hand-crafted networks contain all the characters from the works he studies. The Columbia scholars, on the other hand, rely on automatic network extraction; as such, their analyses, while very powerful, suffer from incomplete data, due to the sheer difficulty of detecting unnamed characters [@ValaEtAl2015MrBennet]. Elson, Dames, and McKeown's approach, for example, only detected 51% of the speech in the books they examined (though, among the speech it did detect, it attributed quotes to the correct characters 95% of the time). My approach will strike a balance between the two extremes: initially, I will build the networks automatically, using a machine learning algorithm that I have developed to detect unnamed characters, but--because much of my focus will be on minor characters, which are predominantly unnamed--I will revise the networks by hand to ensure that they are complete.

### Characterization in the Gospels

Narrative criticism of the Gospels, and especially the study of characterization in them, is likewise thriving. Skinner and Bennema are the major recent scholars of Gospels characterization. Skinner's revised dissertation [@Skinner2009Conflict] argues that many of John's characters have imperfect faith in Jesus, as compared with the ideal faith set forth in John's prologue (Jn 1:1-18). On that basis, he argues against Riley's, DeConick's, and Pagels' views that John's portrayal of Thomas was a polemic against a Gnostic community responsible for the Gospel of Thomas. Skinner has also edited or co-edited several important books on Markan and Johannine characterization [@IversonSkinner2011MarkStory; @Skinner2013Characters; @HaugeSkinner2014CharacterStudies].

Most of Bennema's work [e.g. @Bennema2009Theory; @Bennema2009Encountering; @Bennema2013Comprehensive] has been on John, with an emphasis on comparing Johannine characterization to other literature and attempting to quantify, by means of a rubric, where a given character falls on the spectrum between majority and minority. His most recent book [@Bennema2014Theory] applies that same method to characters in Mark, John, and Acts, in order to develop a unified theory of characterization in NT narrative--the only work thus far with this goal.

In addition, many scholars have studied the minor characters in the Gospels [for instance @Williams1994Other; @Malbon2000Company; @Conway2002Speaking; @Howard2006Significance; @Hylen2009Imperfect]. The most comprehensive approach, however, is @HuntTolmieZimmerman2013Seventy, which brings together studies of 70 characters in John. Their work stands in contrast to the rest of the literature, which tends to study either a single character (as in @Burnett1993Characterization, which looks at Peter) or a handful of characters (as in the second half of @Skinner2013Characters, which comprises chapters on eight characters in John).

Bakhtinian theory (part of the theoretical backbone of my dissertation; see below) has also periodically made an appearance in studies of the Gospels' characterization. The most relevant studies are @McCracken1993Interdividuality, which brings Bakhtin's theory of interindividuality together with "the Kierkegaardian paradigm of self" [@McCracken1993Interdividuality, p. 34] to create a theory of the relationships between biblical characters; @Barnet2003Aesthetics and @Sung2008Infants, both of which examine characters' roles in Matthew using Bakhtin's aesthetics; and @Webb2008Threshold, which examines several Markan passages in light of Bakhtin's concepts of dialogue, genre-memory, chronotopes, and carnivalesque.[^fn8]

## Theoretical Influences

My dissertation mainly relies on formalist theory. The most obvious connection is with the quantitative formalism espoused by the members of the Stanford Literary Lab and its alumni--especially @AllisonEtAl2011Quantitative and @Moretti2001LitLab [^fn9]. In addition, I use formalist categories that lend themselves to interpreting social networks, namely Bakhtin's [@Bakhtin1982Dialogic] interindividuality and the longstanding formalist distinction between story and discourse--what Woloch describes as the contrast between "the fictional events that we reconstruct through the narrative" and "the narrative's actual language and structure" [@Woloch2003OneVsMany, p. 38]. Methodologically, I blend various approaches to social network analysis. Where much of the literature uses either co-occurrence or dialogue networks as the basis for analysis, I use both.^[@ArdanuySporleder2014Clustering and @JayannavarEtAl2015Validating are notable exceptions to this trend.] In addition, I combine automatic network extraction--which reigns supreme in the computer science approaches to SNA--with manual network production, in order to ensure that all characters, both named and unnamed, are represented adequately.

Theory and method will be tightly intertwined in my dissertation. For instance, I take co-occurrence and dialogue networks, with the different information they encode, as a manifestation of story and discourse, respectively. Co-occurrence networks place links between all the characters who are present at an event; thus, it is straightforward to take them as the text's story.^[E.g. at the Sermon on the Mount (Mt 5-7), links would be recorded between Jesus, each of the disciples, and the crowd that was present.] In addition, I recast *discourse* as "the words spoken by the characters in a text." Following this redefinition, it is easy to use dialogue networks--which show the characters that speak to each other--as an abstraction of a work's discourse.

This juxtaposition has already proven useful. In my research on Luke, I found that several kinds of minor and intermediate characters exist in that Gospel's story, while the discourse is sharply divided between Jesus and a host of minor characters (namely, every other speaking character in the book). Moreover, after removing Jesus from the networks, the dialogue network dissolves significantly, as expected, while the co-occurrence network (more specifically, the relationships between Jesus' disciples and the book's minor characters) coheres. Extrapolating back to the text itself, a Jesus-less Luke tells the story of a beleaguered group of people who follow an itinerant, miracle-working preacher, who disperse when their leader is executed by political and religious authorities, but who come back together when they hear rumors of their leader's resurrection. In other words, without Jesus, Luke's story remains very nearly the same--suggesting that the disciples might be a class unto themselves: minor in terms of discourse, but major for the story. I will test this finding to determine whether it generalizes to the other works in my study.

As mentioned above, my dissertation will also extend current applications of Bakhtin's thought to biblical characterization (primarily @McCracken1993Interdividuality and @Webb2008Threshold). Bakhtin's notion that characters exist as a set of interactions between "character zones" applies directly to social networks, which are, at base, a set of relationships between nodes. SNA, I argue, thus provides a rigorous way to explore how a character's majority or minority relates to their plot function. Take centrality and degree, for example: if a character has a high eigenvector centrality and high degree--that is, if that character's node is connected to many other important nodes--it is intuitive that s/he will be a major character. On the other hand, a character with a high betweenness centrality, even if s/he has a low degree, will be an important link between different groups of characters; likewise, a high closeness centrality will indicate that a character is essential to the cohesion of a community within the text, even if s/he does not play a central role in the narrative.

Despite formalism's prominence in my dissertation, I am sympathetic to critiques of it, especially that it is reductive (as in @deMan1971DeadEnd and @deMan1973Semiology) and that it relies on a fallacious understanding of the nature of data [@Drucker2014Graphesis].[^fn13] Literary SNA certainly is reductive. However, reductiveness does not invalidate SNA as a methodology; rather, it simply indicates that SNA should be folded into the larger critical enterprise, so that it may benefit, and benefit from, other areas of criticism. Likewise, I acknowledge that my collecting and analyzing data is fundamentally an interpretive act, not a study of the objective nature of the text. As Drucker insists, "data are capta, taken not given, constructed as an interpretation of the phenomenal world, not inherent in it" [@Drucker2014Graphesis, p. 128, emphasis original].

Finally, in addition to formalist literary theory, I will build heavily on quantitative and comparative approaches to the Gospels. Like @Bennema2009Theory, I will situate the Gospels' characterization among other ancient works. And, in the same way that Bennema uses his (quasi-quantitative) continua of characterization, assigning scores to characters based on their "complexity," "development," and "inner life" [@Bennema2009Theory; @Bennema2013Comprehensive], I will use network measures to determine whether a character is major, minor, or somewhere in between. However, where Bennema collapses his continua into a single spectrum, I allow for the possibility that characters may be major in some ways but minor in others, and that those circumstances may not be reflected directly in the narrative. Moreover, unlike Bennema, who relies on close reading to classify his characters, my interpretation depends on distant reading. In this way, my approach is more like Burridge's [-@Burridge2004WhatAre] now classic study of Gospel genre, in fact a work of "proto-DH," which studies patterns of structure and syntax instead of narratives proper.

## Methodology

No consensus exists yet on the best way to extract social networks from unstructured texts like books. Therefore, I will use an eclectic set of tools for producing social networks from my corpus.

Because English NLP far outstrips classical-language NLP, I begin with open-access translations of the works in my corpus.[^fn14] Next, I will run this corpus through AllPeople, a machine learning algorithm that I haved developed for named and non-named entity recognition, generating TEI XML copies of each text.^[On the usefulness of machine learning for SNA, see e.g. @DeEtAl2012MLforSNA] These TEI documents contain metadata about the characters that AllPeople identified, encoded in such a way as to make computer-based analysis easier. Lastly, to account for any false positives or false negatives in AllPeople's output, I manually clean and tune the entity metadata.

Once the entity-level work is complete, I manually chunk each text into "scenes," encoding these scenes alongside the entity metadata in each TEI documents. I delimit scenes by location, such that the scene changes when the setting does, and I assume that, unless a character is explicitly recorded leaving a scene before others, the same cast of characters is present throughout an entire scene. With these scenes in hand, I generate the works' affiliation networks (viz. networks linking characters to the set of events in which they participate), which I will use to test for correlation between characters' structural functions and the number/importance of the scenes where they are present. Finally, I will reduce the affiliation networks into co-occurrence networks for analysis.

For dialogue networks, I follow a rule-based approach to quoted speech attribution [@ElsonMcKeown2010Attribution]. Afterwards, the process is the similar to building co-occurrence networks: manually cleaning the data and converting it into a network.

To ensure that I record network data consistently as I clean the data, I will follow a set of guidelines that I developed with Paul Dilley for a previous study. The guidelines are as follows.

I define *co-occurrence* to be one of the following, differentiating between *direct* and *indirect* relationships:

1. When two (or more) characters are physically present in a scene (a direct relationship)

1. When a previously established relationship between two (or more) characters is brought into the scene (a direct relationship)

1. When an omniscient character speaks about another character while the second character is not present (an indirect relationship)

1. When a character speaks about another character on the basis of hearsay (an indirect relationship)

Each unidirectional spoken address counts as a separate *instance of dialogue*. For example, if Jesus addresses Peter, and then Peter addresses Jesus, these are two separate events, each recorded as one instance of dialogue for the purposes of weighting. The same rule holds even when the character being addressed is incapable of understanding or responding to the speaker.

As with co-occurrences, I will distinguish between direct and indirect speech. I consider *indirect speech* to be any instance of dialogue that is not a direct quotation, including occurrences where the topic or content of the dialogue is unknown.

If a character is explicitly identified in the narrative, I will take that character as an actor in the network. In the same way, I will treat collective characters (e.g., "Disciples," "Pharisees") as a single actor.

In the Gospels, I infer that a named disciple (e.g., "Peter," "Andrew") is part of the collective character "Disciples," and I will make this inference explicit in the network. However, I will include the character only after s/he is introduced within the network. Because John does not give names for each of the twelve apostles, I include "The Twelve" as a collective character. However, in the Synoptics, each of the twelve apostles are given names, so I will not include that character. In Luke, I will treat the 72 disciples as a collective character ("The Seventy-Two"). Moreover, once they are introduced in Lk 10, I will treat them like a named disciple and infer that they are part of the collective character "Disciples."

## Structure

I divide my dissertation into four chapters. The first chapter covers the theory of literary SNA and the ways it may be applied to the Gospels. Chapter two uses well-established network-analytic concepts to measure characterization in the Gospels and compare it to the biographies in Burridge's corpus. Chapters three and four move into experimental territory, using relational algebra to map out the relationships implicit in each text, and, as mentioned above, removing the protagonist from each network to gain insight into the plot functions of the other characters. Finally, I conclude by determining the extent to which comparative characterization can inform us about the Gospels' genre. I also include two appendices: a brief introduction to SNA and a detailed description of the methodology I followed in creating the networks.

### Chapter 1: Literary SNA, Characterization, and the Gospels

Since Forster distinguished between "flat" and "round" characters in his *Aspects of the Novel* [@Forster1927Aspects], theorists have been concerned with the differences between major and minor characters. However, no consensus has emerged on what roles minor characters play--or, indeed, even how to determine whether a character is minor or major. This chapter provides a survey of existing studies of characterization, both from within and without ancient studies, before exploring some theoretical complications of literary SNA as a methodology, both in terms of the limitations of the current technology and the tension between algorithmic precision and the latent constructedness inherent in the results.

### Chapter 2: Observing Characterization in Social Networks

I begin my analysis by calculating several standard network measures for each network: the degree distribution; the small-world-ness; and the closeness, betweenness, and eigenvector centrality scores for each node. I use these various measures to lay out structural criteria to determine 1) whether a character is major, minor, or somewhere in between; 2) whether cohesive types of minor character exist; and 3) ways in which minor characters can be structurally important (especially in terms of information flow between groups in the text). Building on these results, I show that majority and minority are multi-faceted. That is, a character may be minor in terms of the text's discourse, but major for its story (e.g. the disciples in the Gospels).

### Chapter 3: Extending the Networks: Role Algebras

This chapter will use role algebras [@Pattison1993AlgebraicModels] combined from the co-occurrence and dialogue networks for each work. For each compound relation, beginning with the highest ranked, I will examine the resulting networks to see how minor characters' roles change, if at all, documenting and attempting to systematize the circumstances under which a minor character may become major. This technique has the potential for significant interpretive payoff, rounding out characters who are otherwise so flat as to be "animated scenery" [@Galef1993Supporting, p. 11].

### Chapter 4: Deforming the Networks: Removing Key Characters

Researchers sometimes remove nodes from a network in order to determine the resilience of a network's structure against an attack. In this chapter, I do the same--removing the protagonist (i.e. the subject of each biography) from each network. However, instead of determining the network's robustness, my goal is to determine how much of the story coheres in the protagonist's absence, and which character(s), if any, may be the focus of that story. A significant coherence would indicate a sub-story within the text, with its own (sub-)protagonist(s) and narrative arc, which would otherwise be very difficult to detect.

### Conclusion

I will conclude the dissertation by looking at the Gospels' genre, which is still a matter of debate (despite the general consensus that they are Greco-Roman biography, as in @Aune1987NTLiterary and @Burridge2004WhatAre). I follow @ArdanuySporleder2014Clustering in using my social networks to cluster the Gospels and Burridge's corpus by genre, in order to provide an additional data about the question. Later research will expand the scope to include other genres, such as Greco-Roman novels (as in @Tolbert1990Gospel) or Jewish biography (as outlined in @Aune1987NTLiterary).

### Appendix

The appendix will describe the methodology I followed in producing and analyzing my network data.

## Works Cited

[^fn8]: For Bakhtin, "at a fundamental level, all language and thought is dialogical: each word or thought presupposes an answer. . . . \[E\]ach person, although having irreducible moral status, cannot be considered to have a consciousness in isolation" [@Webb2008Threshold, p. 19]. In the same vein, he conceives of genres as constantly evolving, with each writer engaging in dialogue with previous manifestations of the genre.

    His "chronotopes" are the way space and time meld together in literature: "Time, as it were, thickens, takes on flesh, becomes artistically visible; likewise, space becomes charged and responsive to the movements of time, plot and history. This intersection of axes and fusion of indicators characterizes the artistic chronotope" [@BakhtinMedvedev1991FormalMethod, p. 131].

    Finally, he sees the medieval religious carnival, in which the established order is upended, as continuing after the Renaissance in the literary "carnivalesque":

    > an irresolvable paradox that is seemingly universal and archetypal, that subverts an established value system in order to institute one of its own, that corrupts language and behavioural codes in the work of creating new ones seemingly designed exclusively to displace old ones, and that superimposes one paradox upon another until the original remains forever hidden, undisturbed and unseen [@Danow1995Spirit, p. 63; cited in @Webb2008Threshold, p. 54].

[^fn9]: The authors of @AllisonEtAl2011Quantitative--all scholars then working at, or otherwise affiliated with, the Stanford Literary Lab--coined the term "quantitative formalism." By it, they mean using "precise--ideally, measurable--ways" [@AllisonEtAl2011Quantitative, p. 6] to answer traditional formalist questions about genre, with the connotation that their tools were digital.

[^fn13]: I am less sympathetic to critiques such as Mitchell's, who writes that "everyone knows that the concept of form has outlived its usefulness in discussions of literature, the arts, and media," that "formalists, as we know, are harmless drudges who spend their days counting syllables, measuring line lengths, and weighing emphases (Trotsky), or they are decadent aesthetes who waste their time celebrating beauty and other ineffable, indefinable qualities of works of art," and laments his "own misspent career as a formalist" [-@Mitchell2003StillCrazy, pp. 321, 325 n. 1].

[^fn14]: I will use Conybeare's [-@Conybeare1912Philostratus] translation of the *Life of Apollonius*, Long's [-@StewartLong1892Plutarch] translation of *Cato Minor*, Brooks' [-@Brooks1897Tacitus] translation of *Agricola*, Fowler and Fowler's [-@FowlerFowler1905Lucian] translation of *Demonax*, and Forester's [-@Forester1893Suetonius] translation of the *Lives of the Caesars*. The first work is available on the Internet Archive; the rest are on Project Gutenberg.

    For the Gospels, I will use the 1910 edition of the Revised Version [@MoultonEtAl1910RV]. I make this choice for practical reasons: since the syntax of the RV is similar to that of the other translations I will use, I will not need to develop a separate set of rules for my processing to follow, like I would if I used a more modern translation.